---
layout: post
title: "Financialization of housing"
author: "Ankit Solanki"
permalink: /Financialization-of-housing/
---


It is not been hidden that the housing sector has been seeming to transformed into unprecedented amounts of excess capitalism. We have always seen the housing as a **fundamental universal right** which it should be. After housing has been financialized, it is "viewed as a commodity rather than a human dwelling" as precisely discussed in the [report](http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21264&LangID=E). It is now just a commodity to secure wealth rather than an essential future space for a person and his family. Housing has become a security in global markets. Nonetheless, it is not absolutely incorrect to say that the flow in which financial corporations and funds are taking over the real estate and housing market is causing an increased rate in homelessness, displacement, and unaffordability among citizens.
<br>
Talking about the housing prices, they are no longer comparable with the normal household income levels and in reality managed by the demand for corresponding housing assets among a wide pool of global investors. When housing prices fall, people face a mortgage foreclosure and hence are forced to become homeless and get evicted on a large scale. Such large level evictions and homelessness could be seen after the **financial crisis of 2008**. It gives rise to the outrage about the violations of the right to housing. 
<br><br>
<hr style="opacity: 0.5;">
The [Report](http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=21264&LangID=E) on **the United Nations Human Rights Council's 2017** identifies the dents on the surface of human rights housing by the financialization of housing, let us consider them briefly. I strongly agree on the fact the financialization of institutions or housing undermines the democratic governance and that the international financial institutions often require that states be held accountable to global finance rather than to human rights, which should not appreciate. It is difficult to hear that real estate billionaires increasingly assume the central roles in government and policy-making, which leads to the rise in housing prices about the mortgage rates citizens can normally afford resulting into eviction and homelessness. Another point to think is it highly encourages gentrification and displaces the most marginalized including indigenous peoples. 
<br>
A fundamental necessary change as I think is the relationship policies of the state government with the financial sector with the fact that housing must primarily serve the purpose of residency. **State policies must regulate and engage with the market to ensure the rules under which they operate with the realization of the right to adequate housing for all in need in the society.** States are obliged to make sure that private real-estate investors respond to the need of residents primarily.
<br>
I **strongly agree** with the suggestion of a shift in the already present protocol away from prioritizing financial interests and the commodification of housing in order to retrieve what housing necessarily is, an essential human right.
<br><br>
<hr style="opacity: 0.5;">
**The Sustainable Development Goals and the New Urban Agenda**, the outcome document of the Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development, or Habitat III, will provide an important opportunity for States to engage financial regulatory bodies and actors in the goal of adequate housing for all by 2030 as a human rights obligation. Which indeed refers to a position where the states should review all domestic laws and policies related to foreclosure, indebtedness as well as urban planning and housing development, to ensure that no eviction is permitted when there are reasonable alternatives, and that housing is built for people who need it to live in, not for purposes of speculation and the accumulation of wealth.
<br>
_Analysing the report on India_, it is a developing country and estimated to be the largest population in the world in next 10 years. India must tackle the increased inequality, poverty and housing exclusion with the same conviction it places on its democratic values. Since, I am living in India from last 18 years I can say that there is an extensive need for repair of dilapidated housing stock and the provision of essential services such as electricity, water, sanitation and waste management. It is a concerning situation of homeless people and a large number of people do not have the right to housing. All homeless people live in indigent conditions and have some serious exposure to life-threatening situations and hazards.
As suggested in the report, there is a necessary need of national housing law based on human rights that address growing inequalities and offers a long-term roadmap. The government must address homelessness as a human rights priority with a view to eliminating it by 2030, in keeping with target 11.1 of the Sustainable Development Goals and in keeping with the New Urban Agenda. 
<br>
Also, _Analysing the report on Portugal_, the residents in Portugal face serious problems regarding the housing, lack of affordability, insufficient social for housing and growth in homelessness. Many people are forced to live in informal settlements, without access to basic services including electricity, amidst garbage, and without secure tenure. The rate of evictions and demolitions are also concerning.
<br><br>
As suggested in the report, it is necessary to form a system for National housing with all relevant stakeholders and based in international human rights principles whose main aim is to end homelessness in keeping with the Sustainable Development Goals, target 11.1, to ensure adequate, safe and affordable housing and basic services for all, and the New Urban Agenda. Adequate housing plans for these communities must be developed and implemented in consultation with the affected populations.
<br>
> Every government should develop a national housing strategy based on human rights and should devote themselves for a better future for their residents in next 10 years.